CLAUDE DESKTOP (WINDOWS, MSIX): A PENDING PACKAGE UPDATE TERMINATED THE RUNNING
APP MID-SESSION, DISCARDING ~49 MINUTES OF ACTIVE MULTI-SESSION WORK, WITH NO
PROMPT, NO WARNING, AND NO DIAGNOSTIC TRAIL A USER COULD FIND.

Date of incident: 2026-09-05, 10:04:17 local (EDT)
Reported: 2026-09-05
Platform: Windows 11 Pro 26200, Claude Desktop installed as an MSIX package
Version at time of incident: 1.40609.0.0  ->  forcibly replaced by 1.46388.4.0
Classification: PRODUCT THINNESS (primary), with a secondary DOCUMENTATION
                thinness that made the incident near-impossible to investigate.


ABSTRACT

A Claude Desktop instance running four concurrent Claude Code agent sessions was
terminated without warning. The user, who was driving the machine remotely from
the Claude mobile app at the time, experienced it as an unexplained crash and
lost roughly 49 minutes.

It was not a crash. The app was terminated by the Windows MSIX deployment engine
so that a Claude update which had been sitting staged could be registered. The
app logged its own shutdown as informational and exited cleanly. Consequently
nothing appeared in the Windows Application event log, Windows Error Reporting
never fired, and the log path in the published troubleshooting guidance contains
a fifteen-day-old copy of the logs rather than the live ones.

The update had been staged and waiting for 93 consecutive updater check cycles.
It was not applied by a user action, nor by a restart, nor by any Claude-initiated
step. It was applied as a side effect of an UNRELATED third-party MSIX package
update, which triggered an on-demand registration pass that swept the pending
Claude package in with it and called TerminateApplications on the running
instance.

Three things are being reported, in descending order of severity:

  1. An update can terminate a running app with active work, at an arbitrary
     moment not chosen by the user or by Claude, with no prompt and no deferral.
  2. The termination is logged at [info]. Nothing surfaces to the user, and
     nothing is written where Windows crash triage would look.
  3. The documented log location is wrong on this platform, so a user following
     the published guidance reports "no crash log exists" - a true statement
     about a corpus that could not have contained the answer.


WHY THIS MATTERS MORE THAN A NORMAL UPDATE RESTART

Claude Desktop now hosts long-lived agent sessions. This one was hosting four,
across four separate repositories, coordinating with each other. An update
termination is no longer equivalent to closing a chat window. What was lost:

  - Four concurrent agent sessions, mid-task.
  - Every session-scoped scheduled job. These are held in memory, write nothing
    to disk, and are enumerable only from inside the session that created one.
    Their absence is therefore SILENT and is indistinguishable from a quiet
    period. After the restart, every session believed its loop was running.
  - The remote-control address of every session. All four rotated at once. Each
    session's registration still advertised its pre-restart address, so every
    session was reachable only by an address that no longer existed, and nothing
    announced the change.
  - Peer and user messages sent into the window, which were silently dropped
    because the coordination server is hosted inside the app that died.

None of these are visible as failures. Each one presents as normal, quiet
operation. The user discovered the outage only because their own mobile session
stopped responding.


TIMELINE, FROM PRIMARY SOURCES

All times local (EDT). Sources: the app's own main.log, the Windows System log,
and the Windows AppXDeploymentServer/Operational log. Paths and identifiers are
redacted; see the PRIVACY note at the end.

  09:52:11  System log, Kernel-Power 506
            "The system is entering Modern Standby. Reason: Idle Timeout."
            The machine idled into standby while the user was driving it
            remotely from the mobile app. Remote-tools activity did not hold
            the idle timer off. See SECONDARY FINDING B.

  09:56:48  main.log
            "[updater] Staged version 1.46388.4 is still current
             (latest: 1.46388.4, lastTarget: 1.46388.4)"
            This exact line appears 93 times. The update was staged and idle,
            waiting for a restart that had not happened.

  09:59:52  main.log
            "[keep-awake] started (id=53, first claim=remote_tools)"
            "[remote-tools-device] keep-awake held (pss=0)"
            "[remote-tools-device] served get_device_info"
            The app took a wake lock specifically for remote tools and served
            a remote request. It was serving the user at this moment.

  10:03:52  AppXDeployment 603
            "Started deployment StageByAppInstallerOperation operation on a
             package with main parameter install-x64.appinstaller and Options
             ForceUpdateFromAnyVersion"
            This is a THIRD-PARTY package (a shell-prompt utility), nothing to
            do with Claude.

  10:04:16  AppXDeployment 679
            "OnDemandRegisterPackageList <pkg-a> Claude_1.46388.4.0_x64_<id>
             <pkg-b>"
            The third-party deployment's registration pass enumerated the
            pending Claude package alongside its own.

  10:04:17  AppXDeployment 607
            "Deployment Register operation on package Claude_1.46388.4.0_x64_<id>
             has been de-queued and is running for user SID <redacted>."

  10:04:17  main.log  -- THE LAST LINE THE APP EVER WROTE
            "Windows session ending (close-app) - quitting the app"
            Logged at [info]. No error, no warning. Memory was healthy and flat
            immediately before (sys_free 8504MB of 65221MB, tree_rss ~13.9GB
            steady across the preceding ten minutes).

  10:04:30  AppXDeployment 9643   "TerminateApplications successful."
            AppXDeployment 9648   "TerminateSingleService for update successful
                                   ... terminateService: true"

  10:04:31  AppXDeployment 472
            "Moving package folder Claude_1.40609.0.0_x64_<id> to
             WindowsApps\Deleted\..."

  10:04:17 - 10:53:xx   NOTHING. main.log emits continuously, every minute,
            all day. It contains 5019 lines for this date. Between 10:04:17 and
            10:53 it contains ZERO. This 49-minute hole is the outage.

  10:52:48  System log, Kernel-Power 507
            "The system is exiting Modern Standby. Reason: Input Keyboard."
            The user returned to the physical machine and pressed a key.

  10:53:xx  main.log resumes with a 246-line startup burst.
            "[updater] Version changed since last launch: 1.40609.0 -> 1.46388.4"


PRIMARY FINDING: AN UPDATE TERMINATED ACTIVE WORK AT A MOMENT NOBODY CHOSE

The staged update was not applied on a schedule Claude controls, nor on user
action, nor at a natural boundary. It was applied because an unrelated MSIX
package happened to update, and the resulting registration pass included the
pending Claude package.

That means the timing of a Claude Desktop update termination is, in practice,
determined by unrelated software on the user's machine. From the user's side it
is indistinguishable from a random crash - which is exactly how it was reported.

What is asked for, in descending order of preference:

  1. DO NOT REGISTER A PENDING UPDATE WHILE SESSIONS ARE ACTIVE. The app knows
     it has live agent sessions; it was serving a remote tool call four minutes
     earlier. A packaged app can decline or defer registration.
  2. IF IT MUST HAPPEN, PROMPT. "An update is ready. Restart now, or after your
     running sessions finish?" One dialog would have converted a 49-minute
     silent outage into a deliberate 30-second restart.
  3. AT MINIMUM, MAKE IT RECOVERABLE AND LEGIBLE. On relaunch, tell the user
     what happened and when: "Claude restarted at 10:04 to apply update
     1.46388.4. N sessions were interrupted." Nothing currently says this.
     The user has to infer it, and cannot.

The caveat, stated honestly: the causal link from the third-party package update
to the Claude registration is the strongest available reading of the deployment
log, not a proven mechanism. What IS proven is the sequence - a register
operation on the Claude package began at 10:04:17, the app quit at 10:04:17,
TerminateApplications succeeded at 10:04:30, and the old package folder was
moved to Deleted at 10:04:31. Whatever triggered the registration, the
registration terminated the running app.


SECONDARY FINDING A: THE INCIDENT IS INVISIBLE TO STANDARD TRIAGE

  - The Windows Application event log contains NO Error or Critical events for
    the entire day. Verified across 00:00 to the time of writing.
  - Windows Error Reporting produced no report. Its 1001 events that day cluster
    at 00:57, 04:58 and 08:05 with empty fault buckets. There is no cluster
    anywhere near 10:04.
  - The app's own record is a single [info] line.

This is correct behaviour for a clean exit and it is precisely the problem: the
user is told to check Event Viewer, checks it, finds nothing, and concludes
there is no evidence. A clean exit that discards active work should still leave
a durable, findable record that it happened and why.


SECONDARY FINDING B: TWO INDEPENDENT KEEP-AWAKE MECHANISMS BOTH FAILED TO
PREVENT MODERN STANDBY. THIS IS MEASURED, NOT INFERRED.

The system entered Modern Standby at 09:52:11 on an idle timeout while the user
was actively driving the machine from the mobile app. The app then claimed a
wake lock at 09:59:52 ("first claim=remote_tools") and served a remote request -
seven minutes AFTER standby had already begun.

Across the whole log there are 112 remote_tools wake-lock claims and 111
releases. The unreleased one is id=53, the claim held at the moment the app was
terminated.

⚠️ AND A SECOND, INDEPENDENT MECHANISM WAS ALSO ACTIVE AND ALSO INEFFECTIVE.
The machine runs Microsoft PowerToys "Awake" set to INDEFINITE (settings.json
mode=1, keepDisplayOn=false, written 2026-09-01). The process has been running
continuously since 2026-08-31 05:50:18 - five days, spanning the incident
without a restart.

The system entered Modern Standby anyway, and not once:

    Modern Standby entry/exit events (Kernel-Power 506/507) since 2026-08-31,
    i.e. entirely within the window where Awake was running in INDEFINITE mode:

        2026-08-31   11 entries
        2026-09-01   16
        2026-09-02    3
        2026-09-03    9
        2026-09-04   15
        2026-09-05    4
        ----------------
        TOTAL        58 entries in 6 days, every single day

So this is not a one-off and it is not attributable to a missing user setting.
A legacy execution-state keep-awake does not appear to hold this machine out of
Modern Standby at all.

WHAT THIS MEANS FOR CLAUDE, WHICH IS THE REPORTABLE PART: the PowerToys result
is Microsoft's problem, not Anthropic's, and is included only because it
CORROBORATES the Claude-side observation and rules out "the user had it
configured wrong". Two unrelated wake-lock implementations, one of them
Anthropic's, produced the same null result on the same hardware.

The engineering implication, offered as a hypothesis rather than a diagnosis
because the app's internals are not visible from outside: if the remote-tools
keep-awake is implemented with SetThreadExecutionState / ES_SYSTEM_REQUIRED, it
is the wrong instrument for a Modern Standby (S0 low-power idle) system, where
the OS does not treat legacy execution-state requests as blocking. A remote
session intended to survive unattended needs a Modern Standby-aware power
request, or the app must be exempted.

Two concrete questions:

  - Should remote-tools activity reset the system idle timer, so that a user
    working remotely does not put the machine to sleep by not touching it?
  - Should the wake lock be claimed BEFORE serving remote work rather than
    after standby has already begun, as it was here?

This did not cause the termination and is not being reported as its cause. It is
adjacent, it is cheap to check, and it materially worsened the outage: had the
machine not been in standby, the user would have been at the keyboard and seen
the app vanish immediately rather than 49 minutes later.

LIMIT ON THIS FINDING, STATED RATHER THAN OMITTED: `powercfg /requests`, which
would show exactly which power requests are registered and by whom, requires
elevation and was not run. That is the one measurement that would convert the
hypothesis above into a diagnosis, and it is one elevated command for anyone
who wants it.


SECONDARY FINDING C: THE DOCUMENTED LOG PATH IS WRONG ON THIS PLATFORM

Published troubleshooting guidance points at:

    %APPDATA%\Claude\logs

On this machine that directory exists and contains main.log, main1.log,
main2.log and six others - all of them LAST WRITTEN 2026-08-21, fifteen days
before the incident. It is a dead copy.

The live logs are at:

    %LOCALAPPDATA%\Claude\logs

That main.log was 3.8 MB and being actively written during the investigation.

This is the single highest-leverage fix in this report, because it is the one
that blocks everything else. A user who follows the guidance opens a stale
directory, finds no crash, and reports "there is no log" - a true statement
about the wrong file. The investigation behind this report only found the real
logs by enumerating every Claude directory for files modified that day.

Note also that main.log has rotations (main1.log, main2.log). A crash older than
main.log's first entry is in a rotation, and reading only main.log will report
it absent. Guidance should say so.


WHAT WAS RULED OUT, AND HOW

Ruled out matters here because the incident was initially reported - reasonably -
as a network-triggered crash.

  MOBILE NETWORK TRANSITION (the original hypothesis). The user's phone moved
  from Wi-Fi to cellular around the same period while remote-controlling the
  machine. RULED OUT as a cause: the app logged a clean, deliberate shutdown
  attributable to a package registration, and the machine had already been in
  standby for twelve minutes. The network transition is better explained as a
  CONSEQUENCE of the remote session dying.

  A CRASH. RULED OUT: no error in the app log, no Error/Critical in the Windows
  Application log, no WER report, healthy flat memory immediately prior, and an
  explicit clean-shutdown log line.

  MEMORY EXHAUSTION. RULED OUT: 8.5 GB free of 65 GB at the final measurement,
  and the app's own tree RSS was flat at ~13.9 GB across the preceding ten
  minutes with no upward trend.

  WINDOWS RESTARTMANAGER. Initially suspected by the investigator because four
  RestartManager session pairs cluster at 10:59-11:04. RULED OUT on ordering:
  they occur AFTER the 10:53 restart, not before the 10:04 termination. Recorded
  because it was the investigator's own leading hypothesis and it was wrong.

  MACHINE SLEEP AS THE CAUSE. PARTIALLY RULED OUT. The machine was in Modern
  Standby, but standby alone does not terminate a packaged app, and the
  termination is independently accounted for by the deployment log. Standby
  explains why nobody witnessed it, not why it happened.


REPRODUCIBILITY

UNKNOWN, and stated as unknown rather than guessed. This is a single observation.
The report is filed on the strength of the mechanism being fully traced in the
logs rather than on a repeat count.

It should be reproducible on demand by whoever owns the update path: stage a
Claude Desktop MSIX update, leave it pending with agent sessions running, then
trigger any MSIX registration pass on the machine.


PRIVACY

This report was scanned before submission for absolute user paths, session and
client UUIDs, the user's email address, secret/token/key material, hostnames, IP
addresses, Windows SIDs and device identifiers.

Findings, and all are redacted above: one Windows user SID, one device name, one
organisation UUID, several internal session UUIDs, one WebSocket bridge URL
containing an organisation and device identifier, and absolute paths under the
user's profile directory. Package family identifiers and third-party package
names have been generalised where they were not load-bearing.

Zero secrets, tokens or key material were found in the extracted material.

The raw extracts remain on the reporting machine and are not attached. They can
be supplied on request, redacted to the same standard.
