INJECTED RETRY PROMPTS ARE INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM USER INTENT, AND READ AS REJECTION

Date: 2026-08-21
Product: Claude Code (desktop app)
Classification: product thinness, with a design-choice overlap on the wording


ABSTRACT

When a response stream fails mid-turn, the Claude Code desktop UI shows an
error card reading "Connection went idle -- The response stream stopped before
finishing -- try again in a moment", carrying a "Try again" button. Pressing
that button sends the literal text "Try again" into the conversation as a user
turn, recorded with promptSource "sdk" -- the same value carried by every
genuine user message from that entrypoint. There is no field, marker or
wrapper that distinguishes a transport retry from something the user typed.

The action is user-initiated; the WORDING is the product's. The user cannot
supply different text through that control, and the model receives no
indication that a transport failure occurred.

The consequence is not that work is lost. It is that the model reads "Try
again", sees its own complete prior message sitting above it in context, and
draws the only reasonable inference available: that the output was rejected.
It then changes course.

One confirmed instance is recorded below. In that instance the reinterpretation
happened to be beneficial, which is luck rather than mitigation. The same
reading applied to a correct finding would discard it, and neither the model
nor the user would have any signal that a transport failure -- not a judgement
-- caused the reversal.

Recommendation: mark the injected turn as system-originated rather than
user-originated, and reword it so it describes the transport event instead of
issuing an instruction.


THE FINDING

Measured from Claude Code's own transcripts on this machine, across all
projects, for a 24-hour window.

The injected prompt is recorded exactly like a user prompt:

    timestamp     2026-08-21T12:50:35.123Z
    type          user
    promptSource  sdk
    entrypoint    claude-desktop
    content       "Try again"

For comparison, in the same window the promptSource values observed across 254
prompts were: sdk 215, typed 32, suggestion_accepted 4, queued 2, system 1.

Every genuine user message arriving from the claude-desktop entrypoint also
carries promptSource "sdk". So the field cannot be used to tell the two apart.
A value of "system" does exist in the vocabulary and was observed once, which
suggests the mechanism for marking a non-user turn is already present and
simply is not applied here.


WHY THE MODEL'S INFERENCE IS CORRECT, NOT CARELESS

This is the part worth emphasising, because it is easy to read the incident as
a model failure.

At the point the injected turn arrives, the transcript contains:

  1. The assistant's own prior message, COMPLETE. The stream failed on
     delivery to the user, but the content was recorded and remains in context.
  2. Immediately after it, a user-attributed turn reading "Try again".

Given only those two facts, "the user was dissatisfied with what I just
produced" is the strongest available hypothesis. Nothing in the context
indicates a network fault. The model is not ignoring a signal; there is no
signal.

The user-facing side of the same event does carry the information. The UI
displays a card reading "Connection went idle -- The response stream stopped
before finishing -- try again in a moment." The human sees a transport error.
The model sees an instruction. The asymmetry is the defect.


THE CONFIRMED INSTANCE

Preceding assistant turn (12:50:33), abbreviated: a status report ending in a
self-correction, stating that a fix the session had previously claimed turned
out to be wrong, and that one of two assigned items was therefore not started.

Injected turn (12:50:35): "Try again"

Following assistant turn (12:51:17), verbatim from the transcript:

    "Reading that as: I was scoped to faults 1 and 3, delivered 3, and came
    back with a *menu* for 1 instead of an answer. That's the deference
    failure. Let me do the actual work."

The model explicitly narrates its interpretation. It treated the injected text
as a rebuke of its approach and changed behaviour on that basis. It then
proceeded to do work it had previously deferred.

In this instance the outcome was good. That is the problem: the mechanism is
indistinguishable from a genuine correction, so it produces silent, uncontrolled
behaviour changes whose direction is decided by whatever the model happened to
be doing when the connection dropped.


THE CONTRAST CASE -- THE SAME EVENT, DESCRIBED RATHER THAN COMMANDED

The strongest evidence here is not the failure. It is that the same user, on
the same day, handled a later occurrence by IGNORING the "Try again" control
and typing a description of the event instead:

    "you have two streams that have timed out and likely returned empty.
     please locate them and retry those actions"

The receiving session's next turn began:

    "Let me look rather than guess -- checking the background task outputs and
    eval logs for what's actually empty."

It then located a tool result it had never received: "There's a third task
output I never saw -- b0ykgb94s, timestamped after my last visible call."

This is close to a controlled comparison. The underlying event is the same
class -- a stream that failed to deliver. The only variable changed is the
wording of the turn that follows it. The product's wording produced a
reinterpretation of prior work as rejected. The user's wording produced an
investigation of what was actually lost, and recovered a dropped tool result
in the process.

That the workaround exists and works is not a mitigation. It requires the user
to know the failure mode, to distrust the button the product offers, and to
hand-write a replacement every time. What it does establish is that the
remedy is small: the difference between the two outcomes is one sentence of
copy.

It also surfaces a second issue worth separating: a timed-out stream can leave
tool results that the model never receives, with no indication that anything is
missing. The session above only found the third output because it was told to
go looking. That is a distinct defect from the wording, and possibly the more
serious of the two.


THE FAILURE MODES THIS CREATES

Reversal of a correct finding. A session that has just reported an
uncomfortable or surprising result -- exactly the case above -- is the most
likely to read "Try again" as rejection and soften or retract it. Correct
findings are disproportionately exposed, because they are the ones that draw
apparent pushback.

Duplicated side effects. If the stream failed after a tool call landed but
before the summary was delivered, "Try again" invites re-running work that
already succeeded. For read-only work that is waste; for a commit, a push, or a
file write it is not.

Unattributable behaviour change. Neither party can later tell whether a course
change came from user intent or from a dropped connection. The transcript
records it as a user instruction, so a subsequent review of that session
reaches the wrong conclusion about why the change happened.

Silent correlation with network quality. This user reports repeated Claude
connection timeouts over the past week. Whatever the underlying cause, the
consequence is that the frequency of these injections tracks connection
quality, so the least reliable networks produce the most spurious course
changes -- and produce them invisibly.


RECOMMENDATION

Two changes, independent, either an improvement alone.

1. MARK THE TURN AS SYSTEM-ORIGINATED. promptSource "system" already exists in
   the vocabulary. Applying it here would let the model distinguish a transport
   retry from user intent without any change to wording. This is the more
   important of the two, because it is a data-correctness fix rather than a
   phrasing preference.

2. REWORD IT TO DESCRIBE THE EVENT RATHER THAN ISSUE AN INSTRUCTION. "Try
   again" is an imperative addressed to the recipient, and it is the wording
   that produces the rejection reading. Something closer to the card the user
   already sees -- for example "[the previous response was interrupted by a
   connection failure and may be incomplete; continue from where it stopped]"
   -- carries the same operational meaning without implying a judgement.

A third, smaller point: consider whether the injected turn needs to be visible
to the model at all when the prior assistant message was recorded in full. If
the content survived, the retry is a delivery concern rather than a generation
concern.


4. TREATING AN EMPTY STREAM AS UNREMARKABLE SHOULD BE CONSIDERED HARMFUL

This is the general form of the second defect above, and it is worth stating as
a principle rather than as an instance.

An empty or truncated tool result is indistinguishable, at the point of use,
from a genuine result of "nothing found". The model receives the same thing in
both cases: nothing. So an absent result is silently converted into a negative
finding, and a negative finding is exactly the kind that ends an investigation
rather than continuing it.

The asymmetry is what makes it dangerous. A malformed result announces itself
and gets retried. An EMPTY one looks like an answer. It reads as "the search
found nothing", "the table has no rows", "the process is not running" -- all
conclusions a session will act on and report onward. Nothing marks the moment
where an absence should have been treated as a fault in the instrument rather
than a fact about the world.

The observed instance: a session with a timed-out stream had a tool result it
never received, and found it only because a human told it to go looking. Had
nobody intervened, the absence would simply have been absorbed as "there was
nothing there."

What would address it, roughly in order of value:

  - Where the transport knows a result was dropped or truncated, say so IN
    BAND, in the result the model receives. An error is far safer than an
    empty success, because it cannot be mistaken for a finding.
  - Where the transport does not know, prefer surfacing the uncertainty over
    presenting a clean empty. "No content received" and "no results" must not
    render identically.
  - Consider whether the model should be told, at minimum, that its previous
    turn was interrupted -- which is recommendation 1 above, arriving from a
    different direction.

The user's framing, which is the sharper one: an empty stream should not be
unremarkable on its face. The default assumption for an empty result should be
that the instrument failed, until the input has been shown to be genuinely
empty. That standard is cheap to hold and it is the only one that
distinguishes the two cases.


WHAT WAS CHECKED TO RULE OUT THE OTHER TWO CLASSIFICATIONS

Operating skill. There is no setting, flag or documented mechanism by which a
session can determine that a given user turn was injected rather than typed.
The distinguishing field exists but is not populated with a distinguishing
value. Nothing the operator can do surfaces the information.

Design choice. The injection is clearly deliberate -- it is a sensible recovery
from a dropped stream, and the user-facing card is well designed. What appears
unintended is the attribution: the model receiving it as user intent, with its
own complete output above it. That combination is what produces the rejection
reading, and it looks like a consequence rather than a decision.

The overlap is acknowledged. The wording is plausibly a design choice; the
promptSource attribution reads as a gap. Where two classifications apply, this
report leads with the one that is actionable.


METHOD AND ENVIRONMENT

Transcripts at ~/.claude/projects/*/*.jsonl, parsed line by line, filtered to a
24-hour window. Human prompts identified by the presence of promptSource with
string content and the absence of toolUseResult; subagent turns excluded via
isSidechain. Record shapes were inspected before filtering rather than assumed.

Retry-shaped prompts were located with an anchored pattern over short prompts,
then the three turns either side of each hit were dumped so the model's
interpretation could be read from what it did next rather than inferred.

AT LEAST THREE INSTANCES were observed. One was found in the transcript search
and is the fully documented case above, including the model narrating its own
reinterpretation. Two further occurrences were captured by screenshot in a
concurrent session within a single short stretch of work, both showing the same
"Connection went idle" card; those two were not traced through to their
following turns, so no claim is made about how that session interpreted them.

The transcript search deliberately used an anchored pattern over prompts of 40
characters or fewer, which finds "Try again" as a standalone turn. It would not
match a retry whose text was merged into a longer turn, so three should be read
as a floor rather than a count.

The frequency matters less than the mechanism, which is structural: the field
that could distinguish these two cases exists, is populated with a
distinguishing value elsewhere in the same window, and is not used here. That
is checkable without reference to how often the condition fires.

Environment: Claude Code desktop, Windows 11, 14 sessions and 254 prompts in
the sampled window.
